## Mophun 3D

— Released Q1/Q2 2003, a new game engine for the Nokia 3650/7650 and Ericson P800 mobile phones was introduced, called Mophun 3D. These phones, as mentioned above, use the Symbian series 60 operating system. 

— Mophun, but since it was designed mainly for games - it completely coped with this task - games on Mophun were distinguished by spectacular 3D graphics, speed even on the weakest devices; often such games supported network game via Bluetooth/Internet, 


— mophun 2D is currently only available on a few Sony Ericsson mobile phones (T3xx, T6xx), mophun 3D will be available in the first phase in versions for Symbian OS 6 and Symbian OS 7 UIQ devices represented by, for example, Nokia 7650/3650, Sony Ericsson smartphones P800 or N-GAGE multimedia device, for example. mophun 3D, as the successor to the 2D game engine mophun, should make 3D games available for mobile phones, for which it is primarily intended and for which the operation of 3D games is possible thanks to the speed of their processor. In the next phase, mophun 3D should be available in versions for Pocket PC, Palm OS,

— mophun 3D will have its own 3D API and will come as a comprehensive SDK package with its own 3D graphics routines optimized for each type of mobile device. It is more than likely that mophun 3D, for example, will be placed directly in Flash ROM on new mobile phones (probably again from Sony Ericsson), and on other smartphones and PDAs it will be installed as a classic runtime module via WAP / GPRS or locally via classic serial / USB cable or other type of communication interface.

— mophun 3D will be backwards compatible at the binary level with all existing games for mophun and therefore theoretically it will be possible to run current 2D games for the original engine in mophun 3D. While the runtime of the current mophun 2D engine can run on mobile devices with relatively slow processors (8 bits, 12 MHz), mophun 3D will of course require significantly faster 32-bit processors with a speed of at least 16 MHz. Such devices include virtually all new generations (2G, 2.5G and 3G) smartphones with Symbian OS 6/7, which are estimated to sell 10-15 million units this year alone. It is not advisable to underestimate the number of smartphones sold, even if every tenth user buys even a single game for mophun 2D / 3D, the total is worth a decent amount and of course the authors of mophun are well aware of that.

— The mophun 3D API is very similar to the OpenGL-ES standard, which is again intended mainly for mobile devices, and the development of new 3D games should therefore be relatively fast. mophun 3D will directly support optimized light sources, texture mapping and shadow work for 3D graphics, as well as object collision detection and Z-buffering. Because playing a silent game (most games in the mobile version of Java) probably wouldn't bother anyone for too long, mophun 3D will have its own sound interface. The Sound API will directly support WAVE (WAV), ADPCM and other currently the most widely used audio formats. Of course, mophun 3D will include native support for the infrared port and serial cable, and native Bluetooth support has not yet been discussed. The trial version of the final mophun 3D should be ready in June. At the same time, the distribution of the entire package should be launched to selected distributors, who will be able to create an analysis of market requirements in the field of "mobile" gaming applications. It is difficult to predict when the new 3D games will reach customers directly (ie mobile users), but it probably won't be until the third or fourth quarter of this year at the end of the year.
